[Music]
morning
welcome to breakfast with john kay and
louise mentioned good morning our
headlines today
more parts of england could be moved up
to tier iv
the toughest level of coronavirus
restrictions possibly
as soon as boxing day the port of dover
reopens but around 4 000 lorries are
still stuck on roads and car parks in
kent as their drivers wait for a
coronavirus test
i'm live at the manston lorry park where
mass testing is due to get underway this
morning to try to get
some hawleys at least at home for
christmas
and good morning from berry market where
traders are setting up
what they hope to be one of the busiest
days of the year
but disruption at dover is causing some
shortages of vegetables
[Music]
it's been a year when we all need a lift
and just
wait until you see this an inspirational
story
of care home relatives singing
with their staff and residents merry
christmas
love you
[Music]
thanks very much for watching happy
christmas mom
happy christmas mom good morning for
many of us today is going to be cloudy
and wet more especially
across england and wales where the rain
will be heavy and persistent
of course scotland and northern ireland
they are more likely to be showers
and also brightening up through the day
but i'll have all the details in about
10 minutes
[Music]
good morning wednesday the 23rd of
december and our top story
is fast moving that more areas of
england
could be moved into tier iv the
country's highest level of coronavirus
restrictions
and it could happen as soon as boxing
day in response to growing cases
of that new variant of coronavirus the
community secretary robert generic has
told breakfast that the government will
make a judgment today
on whether the tier structure is strong
enough to tackle the spread
of the virus well it comes as france
lifts
its blanket ban on people entering the
country from the uk
which should allow rail air and sea
services
to resume let's speak to our political
reporter ian watson who's in westminster
for us
ian i say it's fast moving clearly the
government
having to take this very seriously
meeting in i think a couple of hours
well that's right what happened uh last
night john was that there's a meeting of
um
the scientists public health officials
and some ministers this is something
which happens
regularly and they review the data and
they have their discussions and then
the political decisions are taken
subsequently at a ministerial meeting
and that will happen in a few hours time
now
the kind of discussions that that have
been focused on this are
effectively whether tier 4 needs to be
extended outside of london in the
southeast the most
uh stringent restrictions in england
and it does look as though there are
recommendations
to see areas close to london in the
southeast brought into a higher level of
restrictions some may even jump from
tier two
to tier four the question then is over
the time scale for this
and i thought it was interesting the
community secretary on this program
earlier robert generic
all but ruled out anything happening
before christmas so
if you've made christmas plans in tier
one two or three it looks as though
looking those can go ahead on christmas
day
but he did not explicitly rule out the
new restrictions coming in as soon as
boxing day the review of the tiers was
supposed to take place in december the
30th so the fact that these discussions
are going on now in government shows how
seriously they are taking
the threat of the new variant of the
virus and
when he was asked also about the
prospect of a new
national lockdown this is what robert
generic said
we don't have an immediate plan to take
action but
the number of cases is rising and the
variant is spreading
to other parts of the country so we will
see whether it's necessary to to do more
and make sure that the tiered system is
sufficiently robust
for the new circumstances because
remember the tiered system was designed
before we knew the full ferocity of
the the new variant and so we do have to
make sure that it's sufficiently robust
to be able to withstand this and to stop
cases just rising
at the very worrying levels that they
are now in many parts of the country
i thought it was interesting there uh
john that he was talking about
um the the the tier system being devised
before
the the effects of this new variant were
really widely known
now that would leave open the
possibility at some point
of uh for the lockdown but as my
understanding inside
government at the moment they're very
keen to avoid an england wide lockdown
so what he was talking about there i
think also when he was talking about
whether the tier system was sufficiently
robust
is basically i think two things are
likely to happen the number of areas in
tier four is likely to increase
but also there are discussions about
whether new and further restrictions
might be required within those tier four
areas
tier four plus if you like there's very
limited room for maneuver could it be
for example
delaying a return to higher education
nothing has been decided yet but i think
there will be a discussion today amongst
ministers about whether
even the existing stringent tier 4
restrictions are going to be enough to
get on top of this virus
okay ian watson thanks for keeping
across it for us well one of the other
things that is uh happening is changes
from what's going on in dover our
reporter simon jones is in manston where
thousands of lorries have been parked up
and simon they may be able to start
moving what today morning
yes some hope for haulers who are
desperate to get across the channel and
back home for christmas
here at the manston site this is an
existing coronavirus testing site that's
been here for several months for local
people
but today testing at this site is going
to be
ramped up we understand that nhs tests
and trace have already gone on to the
site we're expecting the military here
soon they're going to be offering
drivers here lateral flow tests they're
the tests where you get a result
within about 30 minutes if it's negative
then drivers can potentially then
head down to the port of dover and euro
tunnels show that test result to
the poor authorities and then be allowed
to get across the channel but
here a number of people have been
turning up a van drivers and families
desperate to try and get a test i've
been speaking to one man who's turned up
here
who's stuck here from germany and at the
moment it's a catastrophic
catastrophe situation i can't go back
home
lorries five thousand of flurries i must
come here to make a quarry test
and must make an appointment i don't
know how to do that
this is a big big catastrophe right now
so you've come to manson hoping to get a
test yes of course i hope to get the
test
the people from manson from the kovi
test center told me i must go
to market and the people from margaret
told me i must go back to
[Music]
manson again i don't know what to do i
really don't know what to do
so a lot of confusion here and some
frustration clearly from the lorry
drivers on the site we've heard them
sounding their horns we don't know how
many people will get tested today and
how
quickly it will be lots of questions
remaining but at least some hope
okay simon jones thank you very much
scotland's first minister nicola
sturgeon says she made a stupid mistake
by briefly removing her face covering
while at a funeral wake
in breach of her own government's
coronavirus rules she was pictured by
the scottish sun newspaper standing
talking to three people
inside at a social distance but without
a mask
let's speak to our scotland reporter
alexandra mackenzie who joins us now
live from glasgow alexandra what's been
the reaction to this boat both
politically
and from the public well this is an
embarrassing mistake by scotland's first
minister nicholas sturgeon the
photograph was printed
in the sun last night it shows the first
minister on
friday after a funeral week in edinburgh
now she's standing at one table talking
to three other people at another table
she is socially distanced but crucially
she is not wearing a face mask
and in hospitality settings in scotland
it is mandatory to wear a face mask
unless you are sitting down so she has
broken her own government's covered
rules
now we have had a reaction from the
scottish conservatives
they've said the first minister has made
a blunder
and should know better they've accused
her of undermining
public health messaging by failing to
set a proper example
and they've said that there can be one
rule for nicola sturgeon and another
rule for everyone else
now the first minister has also put out
a statement she said i had my mask off
briefly she said it was a stupid mistake
and she's really sorry
you know she has acknowledged that she
talks every day about the importance of
masks
so she said she wasn't going to make an
excuse she said she was wrong
she's kicking herself and she's sorry
alexandra thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest
with bbc news